Prologue - WORK SONG[1815, Toulon, France. The chain gang, overseen by brutal warders, works in the sun.PrisonersLook down, look downDon't look 'em in the eyeLook down, look down,You're here until you dieThe sun is strongIt's hot as hell belowLook down, look down,There's twenty years to goI've done no wrong!Sweet Jesus hear my prayer!Look down, look down,Sweet Jesus doesn't careI know she'll wait,I know that she'll be true!Look down, look down,They've all forgotten youWhen I get free ya won't see meHere for dust!Look down, look downDon't look 'em in the eyeHow long O LordBefore you let me die?Look down, look down,You'll always be a slaveLook down, look down,You're standing in your graveJavertNow bring me prisoner 24601Your time is upAnd your parole's begunYou know what that meansValjeanYes, it means I'm freeJavertNO!It means you getYour yellow ticket-of-leaveYou are a theifValjeanI stole a loaf of bread!JavertYou robbed a house!ValjeanI broke a window pane!My sister's child was close to deathAnd we were starving!JavertAnd you will starve againUnless you learn the meaning of the law.ValjeanI know the meaning of these 19 yearsA slave of the lawJavertFive years for what you didThe rest because you tried to runYes 24601ValjeanMy name is Jean ValjeanJavertAnd I am JavertDo not forget my nameDo not forget me24601ChorusLook down, look downYou will always be a slaveLook down, look downYou're standing in your grave.ValjeanFreedom is mine. The earth is still.I feel the wind. I breathe again.And the sky clears, the world is waiting.Drink from the pool. How clean the tasteNever forget the years, the waste.Nor forgive them, for what they've done.They are the guilty, everyone.The day begins...And now lets seeWhat this new worldWill do for me![He finds work on a farm.]FarmerYou'll have to goI'll pay you off for the dayCollect your bits and pieces thereAnd be on your way.ValjeanYou've given me halfWhat the other men get!This handful of tinWouldn't buy my sweat!LaborerYou broke the lawIt's there for people to seeWhy should you get the sameAs honest men like me?ValjeanNow every door is closed to meAnother jail, another key, another chainFor when I come to any townThey check my papersAnd they find the mark of CainIn their eyes, I see their fear:`We do not want you here.'[He comes to an inn.]Innkeeper's WifeMy rooms are fullAnd I've no supper to spareI'd like to help a strangerAll we want is to be fairValjeanI will pay in advanceI can sleep in a barnYou see how dark it isI'm not some kind of dog!InnkeeperYou leave my houseOr feel the weight of my rodWe're law-abiding people hereThanks be to God.[They throw him out.]ValjeanAnd now I know how freedom feelsThe jailer always at your heelsIt is the law!This piece of paper in my handThat makes me cursed throughout the landIt is the law!Like a curI walk the streetThe dirt beneath my feet.[He sits down despairingly outside a house from which emerges the Bishop of Digne.]BishopCome in, Sir, for you are wearyAnd the night is cold out there.Though our lives are very humbleWhat we have, we have to share.There is wine here to revive you,There is bread to make you strong,There's a bed to rest till morning,Rest from pain, and rest from wrong.ValjeanHe let me eat my fillI had the lion's shareThe silver in my handCost twice what I had earnedIn all those nineteen yearsThat lifetime of despairAnd yet he trusted me.The old fool trusted me -He's done his bit of goodI played the grateful serfAnd thanked him like I shouldBut when the house was still,I got up in the nightTook the silverTook my flight![Taking the silver cup, he runs off, but is brought back by two constables.]VALJEAN ARRESTED/VALJEAN FORGIVENConstablesTell his reverence your storyLet us see if he's impressedYou were lodging there last nightYou were the honest Bishop's guest.And then, out of Christian goodnessWhen he learned about your plightYou maintain he made a present of this silver--BishopThat is right.But my friend you left so earlySurely something slipped your mind[The bishop gives Valjean two silver candlesticks.]You forgot I gave these alsoWould you leave the best behind?So Messieurs you may release himFor this man has spoken trueI commend you for your dutyMay God's blessing go with you.But remember this, my brotherSee in this some higher planYou must use this precious silverTo become an honest manBy the witness of the martyrsBy the Passion and the BloodGod has raised you out of darknessI have bought your soul for God!WHAT HAVE I DONE (Valjean's Soliloquy)ValjeanWhat have I done?Sweet Jesus, what have I done?Become a thief in the nightBecome a dog on the runAnd have I fallen so farAnd is the hour so lateThat nothing remains but the cry of my hate,The cries in the dark that nobody hears,Here where I stand at the turning of the years?If there's another way to goI missed it twenty long years agoMy life was a war that could never be wonThey gave me a number and murdered ValjeanWhen they chained me and left me for deadJust for stealing a mouthful of breadYet why did I allow that manTo touch my soul and teach me love?He treated me like any otherHe gave me his trustHe called me brotherMy life he claims for God aboveCan such things be?For I had come to hate this worldThis world which had always hated meTake an eye for an eye!Turn your heart into stone!This is all I have lived for!This is all I have known!One word from him and I'd be backBeneath the lash, upon the rackInstead he offers me my freedom,I feel my shame inside me like a knifeHe told me that I have a soul,How does he know?What spirit came to move my life? Is there another way to go?I am reaching, but I fallAnd the night is closing inAnd I stare into the voidTo the whirpool of my sinI'll escape now from the worldFrom the world of Jean ValjeanJean Valjean is nothing nowAnother story must begin![He tears up his yellow ticket-of-leave.]AT THE END OF THE DAY[1823, Montreuil-sur-Mer. Outside the factory, owned by the Mayor, Monsieur Madeleine (Valjean in disguise).]The PoorAt the end of the day you're another day olderAnd that's all you can say for the life of the poorIt's a struggle, it's a warAnd there's nothing that anyone's givingOne more day, standing about, what is it for?One day less to be living.At the end of the day you're another day colderAnd the shirt on your back doesn't keep out the chillAnd the righteous hurry pastThey don't hear the little ones cryingAnd the winder is coming on fast, ready to killOne day nearer to dying!At the end of the day there's another day dawningAnd the sun in the morning is waiting to riseLike the waves crash on the sandLike a storm that'll break any secondThere's a hunger in the landThere's a reckoning still to be reckonedAnd there's gonna be hell to payAt the end of the day![The foreman and workers, including Fantine, emerge.]ForemanAt the end of the day you get nothing for nothingSitting flat on your butt doesn't buy any breadWorkersThere are children back at homeAnd the children have got to be fedAnd you're lucky to be in a jobAnd in a bed!And we're counting our blessings!WomenHave you seen how the foreman is fuming today?With his terrible breath and his wandering hands?It's because little Fantine won't give him his wayTake a look at his trousers, you'll see where he stands!And the boss, he never knowsThat the foreman is always in heatIf Fantine doesn't look outWatch how she goesShe'll be out on the street!WorkersAt the end of the day it's another day overWith enough in your pocket to last for a weekPay the landlord pay the shopKeep on grafting as long as you're ableKeep on grafting till you dropOr it's back to the crumbs on the tableYou've got to pay your wayAt the end of the day!GirlWhat have we here, little innocent sister?Come on Fantine, let's have all the news![She grabs the letter from Fantine.]"Dear Fantine you must send us more money...Your child needs a doctor...There's no time to lose!"FantineGive that letter to meIt is none of your businessWith a husband at homeAnd a bit on the sideIs there anyone hereWho can swear before GodShe has nothing to fear?She has nothing to hide?[They fight over the letter. Valjean rushes over to break up the squabble.]Valjean (as M. Madeleine)What is this fighting all about?Will someone tear these two apart?This is a factory, not a circus!Now come on ladies, settle downI run a business of reputeI am the Mayor of this town[To the foreman...]I look to you to sort this outAnd be as patient as you can---[He goes back into the factory.]ForemanNow someone say how this began!GirlAt the end of the day she's the one who began itThere's a kid that she's hiding in some little townThere's a man she has to payYou can guess how she picks up the extraYou can bet she's earning her keep sleeping aroundAnd the boss wouldn't like it!FantineYes it's true there's a childAnd the child is my daughterAnd her father abandoned us leaving us flatNow she lives with an innkeeper man and his wifeAnd I pay for the childWhat's the matter with that??WomenAt the end of the day she'll be nothing but troubleAnd there's trouble for all when there's trouble for oneWhile we're earning our daily breadShe's the one with her hands in the butterYou must send the slut awayOr we're all gonna end in the gutterAnd it's us who'll have to payAt the end of the day!ForemanI might have known the bitch could biteI might have known the cat had clawsI might have guessed your little secretAh, yes, the virtuous FantineWho keeps herself so pure and cleanYou'd be the cause I had no doubtOf any trouble hereaboutYou play a virgin in the lightBut need no urgin' in the night.GirlShe's been laughing at youWhile she's having her menWomenShe'll be nothing but trouble again and againWorkersYou must sack her todaySack the girl today!ForemanRight my girl!On your way...I DREAMED A DREAM[Fantine is left alone, unemployed and destitute.]FantineThere was a time when men were kindWhen their voices were softAnd their words invitingThere was a time when love was blindAnd the world was a songAnd the song was excitingThere was a timeThen it all went wrongI dreamed a dream in times gone byWhen hope was highAnd life worth livingI dreamed that love would never dieI dreamed that God would be forgivingThen I was young and unafraidAnd dreams were made and used and wastedThere was no ransom to be paidNo song unsungNo wine untastedBut the tigers come at nightWith their voices soft as thunderAs they tear your hope apartAnd they turn your dream to shameHe slept a summer by my sideHe filled my days with endless wonderHe took my childhood in his strideBut he was gone when autumn cameAnd still I dream he'll come to meThat we'll live the years togetherBut there are dreams that cannot beAnd there are storms we cannot weatherI had a dream my life would beSo much different from this hell I'm livingSo different now from what it seemedNow life has killedThe dream I dreamed.LOVELY LADIES[The docks. Sailors, whores and their customers, pimps, etc. Fantine wanders in.]SailorsI smell womenSmell 'em in the airThink I'll drop my anchorIn that harbor over thereLovely ladiesSmell 'em through the smokeSeven days at seaCan make you hungry for a pokeEven stokers need a little stoke!WhoresLovely ladiesWaiting for a biteWaiting for the customerWho only comes at nightLovely ladiesWaiting for the callStanding up or lying downOr any way at allBargain prices up against the wallOld WomanCome here, my dearLet's see this trinket you wearThis bagatelle...FantineMadame, I'll sell it to you...Old WomanI'll give you fourFantineThat wouldn't pay for the chainOld WomanI'll give you five, you're far to eager to sell, it's up to you.FantineIt's all I haveOld WomanThat's not my faultFantinePlease make it tenOld WomanNo more than fiveMy dear, we all must stay alive!WhoresLovely ladiesWaiting in the darkReady for a thick oneOr a quick one in the parkLong time short timeAny time, my dearCost a little extra if you want to take all year!Quick and cheap is underneath the pier!CroneWhat pretty hairWhat pretty locks you got thereWhat luck you got, it's worth a centime my dearI'll take the lotFantineDon't touch me leave me aloneCroneLet's make a price, I'll give you all of ten francsJust think of that!FantineIt pays a debtCroneJust think of thatFantineWhat can I do? It pays a debt.Ten francs may save my poor Cosette!SailorsLovely lady!Fastest on the streetWasn't there three minutesShe was back up on her feetLovely lady!What yer waiting for?Doesn't take a lot of savvyJust to be a whoreCome on, ladyWhat's a lady for?Whores (in counterpoint)Lovely ladiesLovely little girlsLovely ladiesLovely little ladiesLovely girliesLovely little girlsWe are lovely, lovely girlsLovely ladiesWhat's a lady for?[Fantine re-emerges, her long hair cut short.]PimpGive me the dirt, who's that bit over there?Whore 1A bit of skirt, she's the one sold her hair.Whore 2She's got a kid sends her all that she canPimpI might have knownThere is always some manLovely lady, come along and join us!Lovely lady!WhoresCome on dearie, why all the fuss?You're no grander than the rest of usLife has dropped you at the bottom of the heapJoin your sisters, make money in your sleep![Fantine goes off with one of the sailors.]That's right dearie, let him have the lotThat's right dearie, show him what you've got!Old men, young men, take 'em as they comeHarbor rats and alley cats and every type of scumPoor men, rich men, leaders of the landSee them with their trousers off they're never quite as grandAll it takes is money in your hand!Lovely ladiesGoing for a songGot a lot of callersBut they never stay for longFantineCome on, CaptainYou can wear your shoesDon't it make a changeTo have a girl who can't refuseEasy moneyLying on a bedJust as well they never seeThe shame that's in your headDon't they know they're making loveTo one already dead!FANTINE'S ARREST[Bamatabois is a well dressed gentleman.]BamataboisHere's something new, I think I'll give it a try.Come closer you! I like to see what I buyThe usual price, for just a slice of your pieFantineI don't want you, no, no, m'sieur, let me go.BamataboisIs this a trick? I won't pay more!FantineNo, not at all.BamataboisYou've got some nerve, you little whoreYou've got some gall.It's the same with a tart as it is with a grocerThe customer sees what he gets in advanceIt's not for the whore to say 'yes sir' or 'no sir'It's not for the harlot to pick and to chooseOr lead me to a dance![He hits her with his stick, she claws at his face, drawing blood.]FantineI'll kill you, you bastard, try any of that!Even a whore who has gone to the badWon't be had by a rat!BamataboisBy Christ you'll pay for what you have doneThis rat will make you bleed, you'll see!I guarantee, I'll make you sufferFor this disturbance of the peaceFor this insult to life and property!FantineI beg you, don't report me sirI'll do whatever you may wantBamataboisMake your excuse to the police![Javert enters, accompanied by constables.]JavertTell me quickly what's the storyWho saw what and why and whereLet him give a full descriptionLet him answer to Javert!In this nest of whores and vipersLet one speak who saw it allWho laid hands on this good man here?What's the substance of this brawl?BamataboisJavert, would you belive itI was crossing from the parkWhen this prostitute attacked meYou can see she left her markJavertShe will answer for her actionsWhen you make a full reportYou may rest assured, M'sieur,That she will answer to the court.FantineThere's a child who sorely needs mePlease M'sieur, she's but that highHoly God, is there no mercy?If I go to jail she'll die!JavertI have heard such protestationsEvery day for twenty yearsLet's have no more explanationsSave your breath and save your tearsHonest work, just reward,That's the way to please the Lord.[Fantine gives a last despairing cry as she is arrested. Valjean emerges from the crowd.]ValjeanA moment of your time, JavertI do believe this woman's taleJavertBut M'sieur Mayor!ValjeanYou've done your dutyLet her beShe needs a doctor, not a jail.JavertBut M'sieur Mayor!FantineCan this be?ValjeanWhere will she end -This child without a friend?I've seen your face beforeShow me some way to help youHow have you come to griefIn a place such as this?FantineM'sieur, don't mock me now, I prayIt's hard enough I've lost my prideYou let your foreman send me awayYes, you were there, and turned asideI never did no wrongValjeanIs it true, what I have done?To an innocent soul?Had I only known then...Fantine (in counterpoint)My daughter's close to dyingIf there's a God aboveHe'd let me die insteadValjeanIn His name my task has just begunI will see it done!I will see it done!JavertBut M'sieur Mayor!ValjeanI will see it done!JavertBut M'sieur Mayor!VoicesLook out! It's a runaway cart!THE RUNAWAY CART[The crowd parts to reveal that the cart has crashed, trapping M. Fauchelevant.]VoicesLook at that!Look at that!It's Monsieur Fauchelevant!Don't approach! Don't go near!At the risk of your life!He is caught by the wheel!Oh, the pitiful man.Stay away, turn away,There is nothing to do..There is nothing to do..ValjeanIs there anyone hereWho will rescue the man?Who will help me to shoulderThe weight of the cart?VoicesDon't go near him, Mr. MayorThe load is heavy as hellThe old man's a goner for sureIt'll kill you as well.[Valjean attempts to lift the cart. They manage to pull Fauchelevant clear.]FauchelevantM'sieur le Mayor, I have no wordsYou come from God, you are a saint.[Javert takes Valjean aside.]JavertCan this be true?I don't believe what I see!A man your ageTo be as strong as you are...A memory stirs..You make me think of a manFrom years agoA man who broke his paroleHe disappearedForgive me, Sir,I would not dare!ValjeanSay what you must, don't leave it there.JavertI have only known one otherWho can do what you have doneHe's a convict from the chain gangHe's been ten years on the runBut he couldn't run foreverWe have found his hideawayAnd he's just been re-arrestedAnd he comes to court today.Of course he now denies itYou'd expect that of a conBut he couldn't run forever,No, not even Jean Valjean!ValjeanYou say this man denies it allAnd gives no sign of understanding or repentance?You say this man is going to trialAnd that's he's sure to be returnedTo serve his sentence?Come to that, can you be sure,That I am not your man?JavertI have known the thief for agesTracked him down through thick and thinAnd to make the matter certainThere's the brand upon his skinHe will bend, he will breakThis time there is no mistake.[Javert leaves, Valjean is alone.]WHO AM I? (The Trial)ValjeanHe thinks that man is me!He knew him at a glance!That stranger he has foundThis man could be my chanceWhy should I save his hideWhy should I right this wrongWhen I have come so farAnd struggled for so long?If I speak, I am condemnedIf I stay silent, I am damned!I am the master of hundreds of workersThey all look to meHow can I abandon them, how can they liveIf I am not free?If I speak, I am condemnedIf I stay silent, I am damned!Who am I?Can I condemn this man to slaveryPretend I do not see his agonyThis innocent who bears my faceWho goes to judgement in my placeWho am I?Can I conceal myself for evermore?Pretend I'm not the man I was before?And must my name until I dieBe no more than an alibi?Must I lie?How can I ever face my fellow man?How can I ever face myself again?My soul belongs to God, I knowI made that bargain long agoHe gave me hope, when hope was goneHe gave me strength to journey on[He steps in front of the court]Who am I?Who am I?I am Jean Valjean![He unbuttons his shirt to reveal the number tattooed to his chest.]And so Javert, you see it's true,That man bears no more guilt than you!Who am I?24601!COME TO ME (Fantine's Death)[Fantine is lying in a hospital bed, deleriously dreaming of her daughter Cosette.]FantineCosette, it's turned so coldCosette, it's past your bedtimeYou've played the day awayAnd soon it will be night.Come to me, Cosette, the light is fadingDon't you see the evening star appearing?Come to me, and rest against my shoulderHow fast the minutes fly away and every minute colder.Hurry near, another day is dyingDon't you hear, the winter wind is crying?There's a darkness which comes without a warningBut I will sing you lullabyes and wake you in the morning.[Valjean enters.]ValjeanOh, Fantine, our time is running outBut Fantine, I swear this on my lifeFantineLook, M'sieur, where all the children playValjeanBe at peace, be at peace evermore.FantineMy Cosette...ValjeanShall live in my protectionFantineTake her nowValjeanYour child will want for nothingFantineGood M'sieur, you come from God in Heaven.ValjeanAnd none will ever harm CosetteAs long as I am living.FantineTake my hand,The night grows ever colder.ValjeanThen I will keep you warm.FantineTake my child, I give her to your keeping.ValjeanTake shelter from the stormFantineFor God's sake, please stay till I am sleepingAnd tell Cosette I love herAnd I'll see her when I wake...[She dies with a smile; Javert arrives.]THE CONFRONTATIONJavertValjean, at last,We see each other plain`M'sieur le Mayor',You'll wear a different chain.ValjeanBefore you say another word, JavertBefore you chain me up like a slave againListen to me! There is something I must do.This woman leaves behind a suffering child.There is none but me who can intercede,In Mercy's name, three days are all I need.Then I'll return, I pledge my word.Then I'll return...JavertYou must think me mad!I've hunted you across the yearsA man like you can never changeA man... such as you...Valjean (in counterpoint)Believe of me what you willThere is a duty that I'm sworn to doYou know nothing of my lifeAll I did was steal some breadYou know nothing of the worldYou would rather see me deadBut not before I see this justice doneI am warning you JavertI'm a stronger man by farThere is power in me yetMy race is not yet runI am warning you JavertThere is nothing I won't dareIf I have to kill you hereI'll do what must be done!Javert (in counterpoint)Men like me can never changeMen like you can never changeNo, 24601,My duty's to the lawYou have no rightsCome with me 24601Now the wheel has turned aroundJean Valjean is nothing nowDare you talk to me of crimeAnd the price you had to payEvery man is born in sinEvery man must choose his wayYou know nothing of JavertI was born inside a jailI was born with scum like youI am from the gutter too![Valjean breaks chair and threatens Javert with the broken piece. Turns to Fantine.]ValjeanAnd this I swear to you tonightJavertThere is no place for you to hideValjeanYour child will live within my careJavertWherever you may hide awayValjeanAnd I will raise her to the light.Valjean & JavertI swear to you, I will be there![They fight, Javert is knocked out. Valjean escapes.]CASTLE ON A CLOUD[Young Cosette is working as a drudge in the Thenardier's inn at Montfermeil.]Young CosetteThere is a castle on a cloud,I like to go there in my sleep,Aren't any floors for me to sweep,Not in my castle on a cloud.There is a room that's full of toys,There are a hundred boys and girls,Nobody shouts or talks too loud,Not in my castle on a cloud.There is a lady all in white,Holds me and sings a lullabye,She's nice to hear and she's soft to touch,She says "Cosette, I love you very much."I know a place where no one's lost,I know a place where no one cries,Crying at all is not allowed,Not in my castle on a cloud.Oh help! I think I hear them now,and I'm nowhere near finished sweeping andscrubbing and polishing the floor.Oh, it's her! It's Madame!Mme. ThenardierNow look who's hereThe little madam herself!Pretending once again she's been `so awfully good',Better not let me catch you slackingBetter not catch my eye!Ten rotten francs your mother sends meWhat is that going to buy?Now take that pailMy little `Mademoiselle'And go and draw some water from the well!We should never have taken you in in the first placeHow stupid, the things that we do!Like mother like daughter, the scum of the street.Eponine, come my dear, Eponine, let me see youYou look very well in that new little blue hatThere's some little girls who know how to behaveAnd they know what to wearAnd I'm saying thank heaven for that.Still there Cosette?Your tears will do you no good.I told you fetch some water from the well in the wood...Young CosettePlease do not send me out aloneNot in the darkness on my own!Mme. ThenardierEnough of that, or I'll forget to be nice!You heard me ask for something,And I never ask twice![Young Eponine pushes Cosette out. Thenardier says good night to his daughter as the inn fills up for the evening.]MASTER OF THE HOUSEDrinkersCome on you old pestFetch a bottle of your bestWhat's the nectar of the day?[Thenardier enters with a flask of wine.]ThenardierHere, try this lotGuaranteed to hit the spotOr I'm not ThenardierDrinkersGissa glass a' rumLandlord, over here!Thenardier[To himself] Right away, you scum[To customer] Right away, m'sieurDrinkersGod this place has gone to hellSo you tell me every yearMine host ThenardierHe was there so they say,At the field of WaterlooGot there, it's trueWhen the fight was all throughBut he knew just what to doCrawling through the mudSo I've heard it saidPicking through the pocketsOf the English deadHe made a tidy scoreFrom the spoils of warThenardierMy band of soaksMy den of dissolutesMy dirty jokes, my always pissed as newts.My sons of whoresSpent their lives in my innHoming pigeons homing inThen fly through my doorsAnd their money's as good as yoursDrinkersAin't got a clueWhat he put in this stewMust have scraped it off the streetGod what a wine!Chateau Neuf de TurpentineMust have pressed it with his feetLandlord over here!Where's the bloody man?One more for the road!Thenardier, one more slug o' gin.Just one more, or my old man is gonna do me in.[Thenardier greets a new customer.]ThenardierWelcome, M'sieurSit yourself downAnd meet the bestInnkeeper in townAs for the restAll of 'em crooksRooking their guestsAnd cooking the booksSeldom do you seeHonest men like meA gent of good intentWho's content to beMaster of the houseDoling out the charmReady with a handshakeAnd an open palmTells a saucy taleMakes a little stirCustomers appreciate a bon-viveurGlad to do a friend a favorDoesn't cost me to be niceBut nothing gets you nothingEverything has got a little price!Master of the houseKeeper of the zooReady to relieve 'emOf a sou or twoWatering the wineMaking up the weightPickin' up their knick-knacksWhen they can't see straightEverybody loves a landlordEverybody's busom friendI do whatever pleasesJesus! Won't I bleed 'em in the end!Thenardier & DrinkersMaster of the houseQuick to catch yer eyeNever wants a passerbyTo pass him byServant to the poorButler to the greatComforter, philosopher,And lifelong mate!Everybody's boon companionEverybody's chaperoneThenardierBut lock up your valisesJesus! Won't I skin you to the bone![To another new customer...]Enter M'sieurLay down your loadUnlace your bootsAnd rest from the roadThis weighs a tonTravel's a curseBut here we striveTo lighten your purseHere the goose is cookedHere the fat is friedAnd nothing's overlookedTill I'm satisfiedFood beyond compareFood beyond beliefMix it in a mincerAnd pretend it's beefKidney of a horseLiver of a catFilling up the sausagesWith this and thatResidents are more than welcomeBridal suite is occupiedReasonable chargesPlus some little extras on the side!Charge 'em for the liceExtra for the miceTwo percent for looking in the mirror twiceHere a little sliceThere a little cutThree percent for sleeping with the window shutWhen it comes to fixing pricesThere are a lot of tricks he knowsHow it all increasesAll those bits and piecesJesus! It's amazing how it grows!Thenardier & ChorusMaster of the houseQuick to catch yer eyeNever wants a passerbyTo pass him byServent to the poorButler to the greatComforter, philosopher,And lifelong mate!Everybody's boon companionGives 'em everything he's gotThenardierDirty bunch of geezersJesus! What a sorry little lot!Mme. ThenardierI used to dreamThat I would meet a princeBut God Almighty,Have you seen what's happened since?Master of the house?Isn't worth me spit!`Comforter, philosopher'- and lifelong shit!Cunning little brainRegular VoltaireThinks he's quite a loverBut there's not much thereWhat a cruel trick of natureLanded me with such a louseGod knows how I've lastedLiving with this bastard in the house!Thenardier & DrinkersMaster of the house!Mme. ThenardierMaster and a half!Thenardier & DrinkersComforter, philosopherMme. ThenardierAh, don't make me laugh!Thenardier & DrinkersServant to the poorButler to the greatMme. ThenardierHypocrite and toadyAnd inebriate!Thenardier & DrinkersEverybody bless the landlord!Everybody bless his spouse!ThenardierEverybody raise a glassMme. ThenardierRaise it up the master's arseAllEverybody raise a glass to the master of the house!THE BARGAIN[Valjean and Young Cosette arrive at the now empty inn, hand in hand.]ValjeanI found her wandering in the woodThis little child, I found her trembling in the shadowsAnd I am here to help CosetteAnd I will settle any debt you may think properI will pay what I must payTo take Cosette away.There is a duty I must heed,There is a promise I have madeFor I was blind to one in needI did not see what stood before meNow her mother is with GodFantine's suffering is overAnd I speak here with her voiceAnd I stand here in her placeAnd from this day and evermoreMme. ThenardierLet me have your coat, M'sieurValjeanCosette shall live in my protectionThenardierYou are very welcome hereValjeanI shall not forsake my vowThenardierTake a glassMme. ThenardierTake a chairValjeanCosette shall have a father now!THE WALTZ OF TREACHERYThenardierWhat to do? What to say?Shall you carry our treasure away?What a gem! What a pearl!Beyond rubies is our little girl!How can we speak of debt?Let's not haggle for darling Cosette!Dear Fantine, gone to restHave we done for her child what is best?Shared our bread, shared each boneTreated her like she's one of our own!Like our own, Monsieur!ValjeanYour feelings do you credit, sirAnd I will ease the parting blow[He pays them.]Let us not talk of bargains or bones or greedNow, may I say, we are agreed?Mme. ThenardierThat would quite fit the billIf she hadn't so often been illLittle dear, cost us dearMedicines are expensive, M'sieurNot that we begrudged a souIt's no more than we Christians must do!M. and Mme. ThenardierOne thing more, one small doubtThere are treacherous people aboutNo offense, please reflectYour intentions may not be... correct?ValjeanNo more words, here's your price.Fifteen hundred for your sacrificeCome, Cosette, say goodbye,Let us seek out some friendlier sky.Thank you both for CosetteIt won't take you too long to forget.[Valjean and Cosette leave the inn.]Come, Cosette, come, my dearFrom now on I will always be hereWhere I go, you will be.CosetteWill there be childrenAnd castles to see?ValjeanYes, Cosette,Yes, it's trueThere's a castle just waiting for you...LOOK DOWN[1832. The teeming, squalid streets of Paris. Beggars, urchins, prostitutes, students, etc.]BeggarsLook down, look down, and see the beggars at your feetLook down and show some mercy if you canLook down and seeThe sweepings of the streetsLook down, look down,Upon your fellow man!GavrocheHow do you do? My name's GavrocheThese are my people, here's my patchNot much to look at, nothing poshNothing that you'd call up to scratchThis is my school, my high societyHere in the slums of Saint MicheleWe live on crumbs of humble pietyTough on the teeth, but what the hell!Think you're poor?Think you're free?Follow me, follow me!BeggarsLook down, and show some mercy if you canLook down, look down, upon your fellow man[An old beggar woman finds a young prostitute occupying her patch.]Old Beggar WomanWhat you think yer at?Hanging round me pitch?If you're new around here, girlYou've got a lot to learnYoung ProstituteListen you old batCrazy bloody witch'Least I give my customersSome pleasure in returnOld Beggar WomanI know what you give!Give 'em all the pox!Spread around your poisonTill they end up in a boxPimpLeave the poor old cow,Move it, MadeleineShe used to be no betterTill the clap got to her brainBeggarsWhen's it gonna end?When we gonna live?Something's gotta happen now orSomething's gonna give...It'll come, it'll come, it'll comeIt'll come, it'll come, it'll comeEnjolrasWhere the leaders of the land?Where are the swells who run this show?MariusOnly one man - and that's LamarqueSpeaks for these people here belowBeggarsSee our children fedHelp us in our shameSomething for a crust of breadIn Holy Jesus' nameUrchinIn the Lord's Holy name.BeggarsIn his name, in his name, in his name...MariusLamarque is ill and fading fast!Won't last the week out so they sayEnjolrasWith all the anger in the landHow long before the judgement day?Before we cut the fat ones down to size?Before the barricades arise?GavrocheWatch out for old ThenardierAll of his family is on the makeOnce ran a hash-house down the wayBit of a swine and no mistakeHe's got a gangThe bleeding layaboutEven his daughter does her shareThat's Eponine, she knows her way aboutOnly a kid, but hard to scareDo we care?Not a cuss!Long live us, long live us!BeggarsLook down, look down, and show some mercy if you canLook down, look down, upon your fellow man!THE ROBBERY[Thenardier assembling his gang.]ThenardierEveryone here, you know your placeBrujon, Babet, ClaqusousYou, Montparnasse, watch for the lawWith Eponine, take care.You turn on the tearsNo mistakes, my dearsMme. ThenardierThese bloody students on our streetHere they come slumming once againOur Eponine would kiss their feetShe never had a scrap of brainMariusEponine, what's up today?I haven't seen you much about.EponineHere, you can always catch me in.MariusMind the police don't catch you out!EponineHere, whatcher doing with all them books?I could have been a student too!Don't judge a girl on how she looks...I know a lot of things I do!MariusPoor Eponine, the things you knowYou wouldn't find in books like these.EponineI like the way you grow your hairMariusI like the way you always teaseEponineLittle he knows!Little he sees![Valjean arrives with Cosette, now grown up.]Mme. ThenardierHere's the old boy. Stay on the job and watch out for the law.Eponine [to Marius]Stay out of this.MariusBut Eponine...EponineYou'll be in trouble hereIt's not your concernYou'll be in the clear[She pushes Marius away.]MariusWho is that man?EponineLeave me alone!MariusWhy is he here? Hey, Eponine![He begins to follow her, and bumps into Cosette.]I didn't see you there, forgive me.ThenardierPlease M'sieur, come this wayHere's a child that ain't eaten today.Save a life, spare a souGod rewards all the good that you do.Wait a bit. Know that face.Ain't the world a remarkable place?Men like me don't forgetYou're the bastard that borrowed Cosette![Thenardier grabs Valjean and rips open his shirt, revealing the number on his chest.]ValjeanWhat is this? Are you mad?No, Monsieur, you don't know what you do!ThenardierYou know me, you know me.I'm a con, just like you.EponineIt's the police! Disappear!Run for it! It's Javert!JAVERT'S INTERVENTION[Javert and constables break up the fight. Valjean picks himself up and looks for Cosette, who is with Marius.]JavertAnother brawl in the squareAnother stink in the air!Was there a witness to this?Well, let him speak to Javert!M'sieur, the streets are not safe,But let these vermin bewareWe'll see that justice is done!Look upon this fine collectionCrawled from underneath a stoneThis swarm of worms and maggotsCould have picked you to the bone!I know this man over hereI know his name and his tradeAnd on your witness, M'sieur,We'll see him suitably paid.[Valjean and Cosette have disappeared.]But where's the gentleman gone?And why on earth did he run?ThenardierYou will have a job to catch himHe's the one you should arrestNo more bourgeois when you scratch himThan that brand upon his chest![The constables search for Valjean.]JavertCould it be he's some old jailbirdThat the tide now washes inHeard my name and started runningHad the brand upon his skinAnd the girl who stood beside himWhen I turned they both had goneCould he be the man I've hunted?Could it be he's Jean Valjean?ThenardierIn the absence of a victim,Dear Inspector, may I go?And remember when you've nicked him,It was me who told you so!JavertLet the old man keep on runningI will run him off his feet!Everyone about your businessClear this garbage off the street!STARSJavertThere, out in the darknessA fugitive runningFallen from GodFallen from graceGod be my witnessI never shall yieldTill we come face to faceTill we come face to faceHe knows his way in the darkBut mine is the way of the LordAnd those who follow the path of the righteousShall have their rewardAnd if they fallAs Lucifer fellThe flameThe sword!StarsIn your multitudesScarce to be countedFilling the darknessWith order and lightYou are the sentinelsSilent and sureKeeping watch in the nightKeeping watch in the nightYou know your place in the skyYou hold your course and your aimAnd each in your seasonReturns and returnsAnd is always the sameAnd if you fall as Lucifer fellYou fall in flame!And so it has beenAnd so it is writtenOn the doorway to paradiseThat those who falter and those who fallMust pay the price!Lord let me find himThat I may see himSafe behind barsI will never restTill then, this I swearThis I swear by the stars!GavrocheThat inspector thinks he's somethingBut it's me who runs this town!And my theater never closesAnd the curtain's never downTrust Gavroche, have no fearDon't you worry, auntie dear,You can always find me here!EPONINE'S ERRAND[Eponine is alone in the square.]EponineCosette! Now I remember!Cosette! How can it be?We were children togetherLook what's become of me...[Marius returns.]Good God! Oh, what a rumpus!MariusThat girl, who can she be?EponineThat cop! He'd like to jump usBut he ain't smart, not he.MariusEponine, who was that girl?EponineSome bourgeois two-a-penny thing!MariusEponine, find her for me!EponineWhat will you give me?MariusAnything!EponineGot you all excited now,But God knows what you see in herAin't you all delighted now[She refuses Marius' money.]No, I don't want your money sir...MariusEponine, do this for me...Discover where she livesBe careful how you goDon't let her father know...'Ponine! I'm lost until she's found!EponineYou see, I told you so!There's lots of things I know...[Marius leaves.]'Ponine... she knows her way around...RED AND BLACK (The ABC Cafe)[The ABC Cafe, where the students, led by Enjolras, meet to discuss their revolutionary plans.]CombeferreAt Notre DameThe sections are prepared!FeuillyAt rue de BacThey're straining at the leash!CourfeyracStudents, workers, everyoneThere's a river on the runLike the flowing of the tideParis coming to our side!EnjolrasThe time is near...So near.. it's stirring the blood in their veins!And yet beware...Don't let the wine go to your brains!For the army we fight is a dangerous foeWith the men and the arms that we never can matchOh, it's easy to sit here and swat 'em like fliesBut the national guard will be harder to catch.We need a signTo rally the peopleTo call them to armsTo bring them in line![Marius enters.]Marius, you're late.JolyWhat's wrong today?You look as if you've seen a ghost.GrantaireSome wine and say what's going on!MariusA ghost you say... a ghost maybeShe was just like a ghost to meOne minute there, and she was gone!GrantaireI am agog!I am aghast!Is Marius in love at last?I have never heard him `ooh' and `aah'You talk of battles to be wonBut here he comes like Don Ju-anIt's better than an o-per-a!EnjolrasIt is time for us allTo decide who we are...Do we fight for the rightTo a night at the opera now?Have you asked of yourselvesWhat's the price you might pay?Is it simply a gameFor rich young boys to play?The color of the worldIs changingDay by day...Red - the blood of angry men!Black - the dark of ages past!Red - a world about to dawn!Black - the night that ends at last!MariusHad you been there tonightYou might know how it feelsTo be struck to the boneIn a moment of breathless delight!Had you been there tonightYou might also have knownHow the world may be changedIn just one burst of light!And what was rightSeems wrongAnd what was wrongSeems right...Grantaire [mocking...]Red...MariusI feel my soul on fire!GrantaireBlack...MariusMy world if she's not there...AllRed...MariusThe color of desire!AllBlack...MariusThe color of despair!EnjolrasMarius, you're no longer a childI do not doubt you mean it wellBut now there is a higher callWho cares about your lonely soulWe strive toward a larger goalOur little lives don't count at all!AllRed - the blood of angry men!Black - the dark of ages past!Red - a world about to dawn!Black - the night that ends at last!EnjolrasWell, Courfeyrac, do we have all the guns?Feuilly, Combeferre, our time is running short.Grantaire, put the bottle down!Do we have the guns we need?Grantaire [drunk]Give me brandy on my breathAnd I'll breath 'em all to death!CourfeyracIn St. Antoine they're with us to a man!CombeferreIn Notre Dame they're tearing up the stones!FeuillyTwenty rifles good as new.[Gavroche rushes in, shouting.]GavrocheListen!Jean ProuvaireDouble that in Port St. Cloud!GavrocheListen everybody!LesglesSeven guns in St. Martin!GavrocheGeneral LamarqueIs dead!EnjolrasLamarque is dead.Lamarque! His death is the hour of fate.The people's man.His death is the sign we await!On his funeral day they will honor his name.It's a rallying cry that will reach every ear!In the death of Lamarque we will kindle the flameThey will see that the day of salvation is near!The time is hear!Let us welcome it gladly with courage and cheerLet us take to the streets with no doubt in our heartsBut a jubilant shoutThey will come one and allThey will come when we call!DO YOU HEAR THE PEOPLE SINGEnjolrasDo you hear the people sing?Singing a song of angry men?It is the music of a peopleWho will not be slaves again!When the beating of your heartEchos the beating of the drumsThere is a life about to startWhen tomorrow comes!CombeferreWill you join in our crusade?Who will be strong and stand with me?Somewhere beyond the barricadeIs there a world you long to see?CourfeyracThen join in the fightThat will give you the right to be free!!AllDo you hear the people sing?Singing a song of angry men?It is the music of a peopleWho will not be slaves again!When the beating of your heartEchos the beating of the drumsThere is a life about to startWhen tomorrow comes!FeuillyWill you give all you can giveSo that our banner may advanceSome will fall and some will liveWill you stand up and take your chance?The blood of the martyrsWill water the meadows of France!AllDo you hear the people sing?Singing a song of angry men?It is the music of a peopleWho will not be slaves again!When the beating of your heartEchos the beating of the drumsThere is a life about to startWhen tomorrow comes!IN MY LIFE[Cosette stands in her garden on Rue Plumet.]CosetteHow strange, this feeling that my life's begun at lastThis change, can people really fall in love so fast?What's the matter with you, Cosette?Have you been too much on your own?So many things unclearSo many things unknown.In my lifeThere are so many questions and answersThat somehow seem wrongIn my lifeThere are times when I catch in the silenceThe sigh of a faraway songAnd it singsOf a world that I long to seeOut of reachJust a whisper awayWaiting for me!Does he know I'm alive?Do I know if he's real?Does he see what I saw?Does he feel what I feel?In my lifeI'm no longer aloneNow the love in my lifeIs so nearFind me now, find me here!ValjeanDear Cosette,You're such a lonely childHow pensive, how sad you seem to meBelieve me, were it within my powerI'd fill each passing hourHow quiet it must be, I can seeWith only me for company.CosetteThere's so little I knowThat I'm longing to knowOf the child that I wasIn a time long agoThere's so little you sayOf the life you have knownWhy you keep to yourselfWhy we're always aloneSo dark, so dark and deepThe secrets that you keep!In my lifeI have all that I wantYou are loving and gentle and good.But Papa, dear Papa,In your eyes I am just like a chileWho is lost in a woodValjeanNo more wordsNo more words, it's a time that is deadThere are wordsThat are better unheard, better unsaid.CosetteIn my lifeI'm no longer a child and I yearnFor the truth that you knowOf the years... years ago!ValjeanYou will learnTruth is given by GodTo us allIn our timeIn our turn[Valjean leaves the garden; Marius and Eponine are outside.]MariusIn my lifeShe has burst like the music of angelsThe light of the sunAnd my life seems to stopAs if something is overAnd something has scarcely begun.EponineYou're the friend who has brought me hereThanks to you I am one with the GodsAnd Heaven is near!And I soar through a world that is new that is free...Eponine [to herself]Every word that he says is a dagger in me!In my lifeThere's been no one like him anywhereAnywhere, where he is...If he asked... I'd be hisMarius & EponineIn my lifeThere is someone who touches my lifeMariusWaiting nearEponineWaiting hereA HEART FULL OF LOVE[Marius goes into the garden, leaving Eponine outside.]MariusA heart full of loveA heart full of songI'm doing everything all wrongOh God, for shameI do not even know your nameDead Mad'moiselleWon't you say?Will you tell?CosetteA heart full of loveNo fear, no regretMariusMy name is Marius PontmercyCosetteAnd mine's CosetteMariusCosette, I don't know what to sayCosetteThen make no soundMariusI am lostCosetteI am found!MariusA heart full of lightCosetteA night bright as dayMariusAnd you must never go awayCosette, CosetteCosetteThis is a chain we'll never breakMariusDo I dream?CosetteI'm awake!MariusA heart full of loveEponine [outside, interjecting]He was never mine to loseCosetteA heart full of youEponineWhy regret what could not be?MariusA single look and then I knew.EponineThese are words he'll never sayCosetteI knew it too.EponineNot to me...MariusFrom today...EponineNot to me...CosetteEvery dayEponineNot for me...Cosette & MariusFor it isn't a dreamNot a dreamAfter all!EponineHis heart full of loveHe will neverFeel this way...THE ATTACK ON RUE PLUMETEponine'Parnasse, what are you doingSo far out of our patch?MontparnasseThis house, we're going to do itRich man, plenty of scratchYou remember he's the oneWho got away the other dayGot a number on his chestPerhaps a fortune put away!EponineOh Lord, somebody help me!Dear God, what'll I do?He'll think this is an ambushHe'll think I'm in it too!What'll I do, what'll I say?I've got to warn them hereI've got to find a way.[Thenardier arrives with the rest of his gang.]ThenardierThis is his lairI've seen the old fox aroundHe keeps himself to himselfHe's staying close to the groundI smell profit here!Ten years agoHe came and paid for CosetteI let her go for a songIt's time we settled the debtThis'll cost him dearBrujonWhat do I careWho you should robGive me my shareFinish the job!ThenardierYou shut your mouthGive me your hand[He notices Eponine but doesn't recognize her.]BrujonWhat have we here?ThenardierWho is this hussy?BabetIt's your brat EponineDon't you know your own kidWhy's she hanging about you?Thenardier'Ponine, get on homeYou're not needed in thisWe're enough here without youEponineI know this houseI tell you there's nothing here for youJust the old man and the girlThey live ordinary livesThenardierDon't interfereYou've got some gallTake care, young miss,You've got a lot to say!BrujonShe's going softClaquesousHappens to allMontparnasseGo home, 'Ponine,Go home, you're in the wayEponineI'm gonna scream, I'm gonna warn them here.ThenardierOne little scream and you'll regret it for a year.ClaquesousWhat a palaverWhat an absolute treatTo watch a cat and it's fatherPick a bone in the streetBrujonNot a sound out of you!EponineWell I told you I'd do it, told you I'd do it...[She screams.]ThenardierYou wait my girl, you'll rue this nightI'll make you scream, you'll scream all rightLeave her to me, don't wait aroundMake for the sewers, go underground![The gang scatters.]MariusIt was your cry sent them awayOnce more 'Ponine saving the dayDearest Cosette, my friend 'PonineBrought me to you, showed me the way!Someone is nearLet's not be seenSomebody's here...[Marius leaves quickly as Valjean enters.]ValjeanMy God, CosetteI heard a cry in the darkI heard the shout of angry voices in the street.CosetteThat was my cry you heard, Papa.I was afraid of what they'd do.They ran away when they heard my cryValjeanCosette, my child, what will become of you?CosetteThree men I saw beyond the wallThree men in shadow moving fastValjeanThis is a warning to us allThese are the shadows of the pastMust be Javert!He's found my cover at last!I've got to get Cosette awayBefore they return!We must get away from shadowsThey will never let us beTomorrow to CalaisThen a ship across the sea!Hurry, Cosette, prepare to leave and say no moreTomorrow we'll away!Hurry, Cosette, it's time to close another doorAnd live another day!ONE DAY MOREValjeanOne day more,Another day, another destiny,This never ending road to Calvary;These men who seem to know my crimeWill surely come a second time,One day more...MariusI did not live until today,How can I live when we are parted?ValjeanOne day more...Marius & CosetteTomorrow you'll be worlds away,And yet with you, my world has started.EponineOne more day all on my ownMarius & CosetteWill we ever meet again?EponineOne more day with him not caringMarius & CosetteI was born to be with you.EponineWhat a life I might have knownMarius & CosetteAnd I swear I will be true!EponineBut he never saw me there...EnjolrasOne more day before the storm!At the barricades of Freedom!When our ranks begin to form,Will you take your place with me?MariusDo I follow where she goes!Shall I join my brothers there!Do I stay or do I dare?AllThe time is nowThe place is hereValjeanOne day more!JavertOne more day till revolution,We will nip it in the bud!I will join these little schoolboys,They will wet themselves with blood!ValjeanOne day more!M. & Mme. ThenardierWatch'm run amuck,Catch'm when they fall,Never know your luckWhen there's a free for all,Here a little pinch,There a little touch,Most of them are gonersSo they won't miss much!Various StudentsOne day to a new beginningRaise the flag of freedom high!Every man will be a kingEvery man will be a kingThere's a new world for the winningThere's a new world to be wonDo you hear the people sing?MariusMy place is here,I fight with you!ValjeanOne day more!Marius & CosetteI did not live until today...Tomorrow you'll be worlds awayAnd yet with you my world has startedEponineOne more day all on my own...JavertI will join these people's herosI will follow where they goI will know their little secrets,I will know the things they know.ValjeanOne day more!M. & Mme. ThenardierWatch 'em run amuckCatch 'em as they fallNever know your luckWhen there's a free-for-allJavertOne more day to revolutionWe weill nip it in the budWe'll be ready for these schoolboysTommorow is the judgement dayValjeanTomorrow we'll be far away,Tomorrow is the judgement dayAllTomorrow we'll discoverWhat our God in Heaven has in store!One more dawnOne more dayOne day more![The curtain falls.]UPON THESE STONES - BUILDING THE BARRICADE[Enjolras is addressing the revolutionaries.]EnjolrasHere upon these stonesWe will build our barricadeIn the heart of the cityWe claim as our own!Each man to his dutyAnd don't be afraid.Wait! I will need a reportOn the strength of the foe.Javert [disguised as a rebel]I can find out the truthI know their waysFought their warsServed my timeIn the daysOf my youth!Various StudentsNow the people will fightAnd so they mightDogs will barkFleas will bite.They will do what is right[Marius spots Eponine, who is dressed as a boy.]MariusHey little boy, what's this I see?God Eponine, the things you do!EponineI know this is no place for meStill I would rather be with you.MariusGet out before the trouble startsGet out, 'Ponine, you might get shotEponineI got you worried, now I haveThat shows you like me quite a lotMariusThere is a way that you can helpYou are the answer to a prayerPlease take this letter to CosetteAnd pray to God that she's still there![She walks to the Rue Plumet...]EponineLittle you know...Little you care![...where she meets Valjean.]I have a letter M'sieurIt's addressed to your daughter CosetteIt's from a boy at the barricade, SirIn the Rue de Villette.ValjeanGive me that letter here, my boyEponineHe said to give it to CosetteValjeanYou have my word that my daughter will knowWhat this letter contains.[He gives her a coin.]Tell the young man she will read it tomorrowAnd here's for your painsGo careful now, stay out of sightThere's danger in the streets tonight.[He opens the letter... and reads it.]``Dearest Cosette, you have entered my soulAnd soon you will be gone.Can it be only a day since we metAnd the world was reborn?If I should fall in the battle to comeLet this be my goodbyeNow that I know you love me as wellIt is harder to die...I pray that god will bring me homeTo be with you.Pray for your Marius, he prays for you!''[Valjean goes in, leaving Eponine alone.]ON MY OWNEponineAnd now I'm all alone againNowhere to turn, no one to go toWithout a home without a friendWithout a face to say hello toAnd now the night is nearI can make believe he's hereSometimes I walk alone at nightWhen everybody else is sleepingI think of him and I'm happyWith the company I'm keepingThe city goes to bedAnd I can live inside my headOwn my ownPretending he's beside meAll aloneI walk with him till morningWithout himI feel his arms around meAnd when I lose my way I close my eyesAnd he has found meIn the rain the pavement shines like silverAll the lights are misty in the riverIn the darkness, the trees are full of starlightAnd all I see is him and me forever and foreverAnd I know it's only in my mindThat I'm talking to myself and not to himAnd although I know that he is blindStill I say, there's a way for usI love himBut when the night is overHe is goneThe river's just a riverWithout himThe world around me changesThe trees are bare and everywhereThe streets are full of strangersI love himBut every day I'm learningAll my lifeI've only been pretendingWithout meHis world would go on turningA world that's full of happinessThat I have never knownI love himI love himI love himBut only on my own.UPON THESE STONES - AT THE BARRICADE[The barricade is now complete.]StudentsNow we pledge ourselves to hold this barricadeLet them come in their legionsAnd they will be metHave faith in yourselvesAnd don't be afraidLet's give 'em a screwingThat they'll never forget!This is where it begins!And if I should die in the fight to be freeWhere the fighting is hardestThere will I beLet them come if they dareWe'll be there!Army Officer [Offstage]You at the barricade listen to thisNo one is coming to help you to fightYou're on your ownYou have no friendsGive up your guns - or die!EnjolrasDamn their warnings, damn their liesThey will see the people rise!StudentsDamn their warnings, damn their liesThey will see the people rise![Javert climbs over the barricade.]JavertListen my friendsI have done as I saidI have been to their linesI have counted each manI will tell what I canBetter be warnedThey have armies to spareAnd the danger is realWe will need all our cunningTo bring them to heel.EnjolrasHave faithIf you know what their movements areWe'll spoil their gameThere are ways that a people can fightWe shall overcome their powerJavertI have overheard their plansThere will be no attack tonightThey intend to starve us outBefore they start a proper fightConcentrate their forceHit us from the right.LITTLE PEOPLE[Gavroche enters.]GavrocheLiar!Good evening, dear inspectorLovely evening, my dear.I know this man, my friendsHis name is Inspector JavertSo don't believe a word he says'Cause none of it's trueThis only goes to showWhat little people can do!And little people knowWhen little people fightWe may look easy pickingsBut we've got some biteSo never kick a dogBecause he's just a pupWe'll fight like twenty armiesAnd we won't give upSo you'd better run for coverWhen the pup grows up!GrantaireBravo, little Gavroche, you're the top of the class!ProuvaireSo what are we going to doWith this snake in the grass?EnjolrasTie this man and take himTo the tavern in thereThe people will decide your fateInspector Javert!Various StudentsTake the bastard now and shoot him!Let us watch the devil danceYou'd have done the same InspectorIf we'd let you have your chance!JavertShoot me now or shoot me laterEvery schoolboy to his sportDeath to each and every traitorI renounce your people's court!CombeferreThough we may not all survive hereThere are things that never dieGrantaireWhat's the difference? Die a schoolboyDie a policeman die a spy!EnjolrasTake this man, bring him throughThere is work we have to do![Javert is bundled away as the first shots ring out. Eponine enters, wounded.]JolyThere's a boy climbing the barricade!MariusGood God! What are you doing?'Ponine, have you no fear?Have you seen my beloved?Why have you come back here?EponineTook the letter like you saidI met her father at the doorHe said he would give it[She collapses]Don't think I can stand any more.MariusEponine, what's wrong? I feel...There's something wet upon your hair[There is blood on his hands]Eponine, you're hurtYou need some help!Oh God, it's everywhere....A LITTLE FALL OF RAINEponineDon't you fret, M'sieur MariusI don't feel any painA little fall of rainCan hardly hurt me nowYou're here, that's all I need to knowAnd you will keep me safeAnd you will keep me closeAnd rain will make the flowers grow.MariusBut you will live, 'Ponine - dear God above...If I could close your wounds with words of love...EponineJust hold me now, and let it be.Shelter me, comfort me...MariusYou would liveA hundred yearsIf I could show you howI won't desert you now...EponineThe rain can't hurt me nowThis rain will wash away what's pastAnd you will keep me safeAnd you will keep me closeI'll sleep in your embrace at lastThe rain that brings you hereIs Heaven-blessed!The skies begin to clearAnd I'm at restA breath away from where you areI've come home from so farSo don't you fret, M'sieur MariusI don't feel any painA little fall of rainCan hardly hurt me nowThat's all I need to knowAnd you will keep me safeAnd you will keep me closeAnd rainWill make the flowers...Marius [in counterpoint]Hush-a-bye, dear EponineYou won't feel any painA little fall of rainCan hardly hurt you nowI'm hereI will stay with youTill you are sleepingAnd rainWill make the flowers...Grow.[She dies. Marius kisses her, then lays her on the ground.]EnjolrasShe is the first to fallThe first of us to fall upon this barricadeMariusHer name was EponineHer life was cold and dark, yet she was unafraid.CombeferreWe fight here in her nameProuvaireShe will not die in vain.LesglesShe will not be betrayed.[They carry her body off.]NIGHT OF ANGUISH[Valjean arrives, dressed as a soldier.]JolyHere comes a man in uniformWhat brings you to this place?ValjeanI come here as a volunteerJolyApproach and show your face.SentryYou wear an army uniform.ValjeanThat's why they let me through.JolyYou've got some years behind you sir.ValjeanThere's much that I can do.JolyYou see that prisoner over there?GrantaireA volunteer like you!CombeferreA spy who calls himself Javert!GrantaireHe's going to get it too...SentryThey're getting ready to attack!THE FIRST ATTACK[Enjolras gives Valjean a gun.]EnjolrasTake this and use it well!But if you shoot us in the back,You'll never live to tell.Random VoicesPlatoon of sappers advancing toward the barricade!Troops behind them, fifty men or more!EnjolrasFIRE![Gunfire is heard.]FeuillySniper![Valjean shoots a sniper who is aiming at Enjolras.]LesglesSee how they run away!GrantaireBy God we've won the day!EnjolrasThey will be back again,Make an attack again.[To Valjean.]For your presence of mindFor the deed you have doneI will thank you M'sieurWhen our battle is won.ValjeanGive me no thanks M'sieurThere is something that you can do.EnjolrasIf it is in my power...ValjeanGive me the spy JavertLet me take care of himJavertThe law is inside outThe world is upside downEnjolrasDo what you have to do,The man belongs to you.The enemy may be regrouping. Hold yourself in readiness.Come my friends, back to your positions.The night is falling fast...[Valjean has taken Javert away.]ValjeanWe meet again.JavertYou've hungered for this all your life;Take your revenge!How right you should kill with a knife![Valjean cuts the ropes which bind Javert.]ValjeanYou talk too much,Your life is safe in my hands.JavertI don't understandValjeanGet out of here.JavertValjean, take care,I'm warning you...ValjeanClear out of here.JavertOnce a thief, forever a thiefWhat you want you always steal!You would trade your life for mine.Yes, Valjean, you want a deal.Shoot me now for all I care!If you let me go beware.You'll still answer to Javert!ValjeanYou are wrong, and always have been wrong.I'm a man, no worse than any man.You are free, and there are no conditions,No bargains or petitions.There's nothing that I blame you for.You've done your duty, nothing more.If I come out of this alive, you'll find meAt number fifty-five Rue PlumetNo doubt our paths will cross again.[Valjean fires his gun into the air, Javert leaves quickly. Muted applause from the students who think Javert has been shot.]EnjolrasCourfeyrac, you take the watchThey won't attack until it's lightEverybody stay awakeWe must be ready for the fightFor the final fightLet no one sleep tonight!DRINK WITH ME (The Night)[The defenders settle down for the night with wine and a song.]EnjolrasMarius, rest.FeuillyDrink with meTo days gone bySing with meThe songs we knewProuvaireHere's to pretty girlsWho went to our headsJolyHere's to witty girlsWho went to our bedsAllHere's to themAnd here's to you!GrantaireDrink with meTo days gone byCan it beYou fear to die?Will the world remember youWhen you fall?Could it be your deathMeans nothing at all?Is your life just one more lie?MenDrink with meTo daysGone byTo the lifeThat usedTo beLet the wine of friendshipNever run dryWomen (in counterpoint)Drink with meTo daysGone byTo the lifeThat usedTo beAt the shrine of friendshipNever say dieAllHere's to youAnd here'sTo me...MariusDo I care if I should dieNow she goes across the sea?Life without CosetteMeans nothing at allWould you weep, Cosette,Should Marius fall?Will you weep,Cosette,For me?[Marius settles down to sleep.]BRING HIM HOME[Valjean is standing over Marius at the barricade.]ValjeanGod on highHear my prayerIn my needYou have always been thereHe is youngHe's afraidLet him restHeaven blessed.Bring him homeBring him homeBring him home.He's like the son I might have knownIf God had granted me a son.The summers dieOne by oneHow soon they flyOn and onAnd I am oldAnd will be gone.Bring him peaceBring him joyHe is youngHe is only a boyYou can takeYou can giveLet him beLet him liveIf I dieLet me dieLet him liveBring him homeBring him homeBring him home.DAWN OF ANGUISH[Day breaks.]EnjolrasThe people have not stirredWe are abandoned by those who still live in fear.The people have not heard.Yet will will not abandon those who cannot hear.Let us not waste livesLet all the women and fathers of childrenGo from here.FeuillyDrink with me to days gone bySing with me the songs we knewAllAt the shrine of friendshipRaise your glass highLet the wine of friendshipNever run dryIf I dieI die with you!THE SECOND ATTACK (The Death of Gavroche)[The battle recommences.]EnjolrasHow do we stand, Feuilly?Make your report.FeuillyWe've guns enoughBut ammunition shortMariusLet me go into the streetsThere are bodies all aroundAmmunition to be hadLots of bullets to be found!EnjolrasI won't let you goIt's too much of a chance.MariusThe same is trueFor any man here!ValjeanLet me goHe's no more than a boyI am oldI have nothing to fearGavrocheYou need somebody quickerAnd I volunteer![Gavroche climbs the barricade.]LesglesCome back Gavroche, don't you dare!JolySomeone pull him down at once!GavrocheLook at me, I'm almost there![A shot rings out from beyond the barricade. Gavroche is hit.]GavrocheLittle people know, whenLittle people fight, we[Another shot is fired.]May look easy pickingsBut we've got some bite![He is hit again.]So never kick a dogBecause he's just a pupWe'll fight like twenty armiesAnd we won't give upSo you'd better run for coverWhen the pup grows......[He dies.]THE FINAL BATTLEArmy Officer [from beyond the barricade]You at the barricade listen to thisThe people of Paris sleep in their bedsYou have no chanceNo chance at allWhy throw your lives away?EnjolrasLet us die facing our foesMake them bleed while we canCombeferreMake 'em pay through the noseCourfeyracMake 'em pay for every man!EnjolrasLet others riseTo take our placeUntil the earth is free![Amidst increasingly heavy gunfire, Marius is shot. Enjolras is killed at the summit of the barricade. All at the barricade are killed, except Marius, who is wounded and unconscious, and Valjean. Valjean discovers that Marius is still alive and carries him down into the sewers to escape. Javert climbs over the barricade looking for Valjean's body. Not finding it, he realizes that Valjean must be in the sewers, so he goes off to where he must emerge.]DOG EAT DOG (The Sewers)[Thenardier is picking through the corpses in the sewers.]ThenardierHere's a hint of goldStuck into a toothPardon me M'sieurYou won't be needing this no more.Shouldn't be too hard to sell.Add it to the pileAdd it to the stockHere among the sewer ratsA breath away from hellYou get accustomed to the smell.Well someone's got to clean 'em up, my friendsBodies on the highwayLaw and order upside downSomeone's got to collect their odds and endsAs a service to the town![Valjean arrives, carrying Marius, and collapses. Thenardier robs Marius.]Here's a tasty ringPretty little thingWouldn't want to waste itThat would really be a crimeThank you sir, I'm in your debtHere's another toyTake it off the boyHis heart's no longer goingAnd he's lived his little timeBut his watch is ticking yet!Well, someone's got to clean them up, my friendsBefore the little harvestDisappears into the mudSomeone's got to collect their odds and endsWhen the gutters run with blood.It's a world where the dog eats the dogWhere they kill for bones in the streetAnd God in His HeavenHe don't interfere'Cause he's dead as the stiffs at my feetI raise my eyes to see the heavensAnd only the moon looks downThe harvest moon shines down![He turns over Valjean's body, recognizes him, and leaves. Eventually, Valjean picks up Marius again and walks through the sewers. As they emerge, they meet Javert.]ValjeanIt's you, JavertI knew you wouldn't wait too longThe faithful servant at his post once more!This man's done no wrong,And he needs a doctor's care.JavertI warned you I would not give inI won't be swayedValjeanAnother hour yetAnd then I'm yoursAnd all our debts are paid.JavertThe man of mercyComes againAnd talks of justiceValjeanCome, time is running shortLook down, JavertHe's standing in his graveGive way, JavertThere is a life to save.JavertTake him Valjean,Before I change my mindI will be waiting24601.[Valjean carries Marius off.]JAVERT'S SUICIDE[Javert walks the deserted streets until he comes to a bridge over the river Seine.]JavertWho is this man?What sort of devil is he?To have me caught in a trapAnd choose to let me go free?It was his hour at lastTo put a seal on my fateWipe out the pastAnd wash me clean off the slate!All it would takeWas a flick of his knifeVengence was hisAnd he gave me back my life!Damned if I'll live in the debt of a theif!Damned if I'll yield at the end of the chase.I am the Law and the Law is not mockedI'll spit his pity right back in his faceThere is nothing on earth that we shareIt is either Valjean or Javert!How can I now allow this manTo hold dominion over me?This desperate man whom I have huntedHe gave me my life, he gave me freedom.I should have perished by his hand!It was his right.It was my right to die as wellInstead I live, but live in hell!And my thoughts fly apartCan this man be believed?Shall his sins be forgiven?Shall his crimes be reprieved?And must I now begin to doubtWho never doubted all these years?My heart is stone and still it tremblesThe world I have known is lost in shadow.Is he from heaven or from hell?And does he knowThat granting me my life todayThis man has killed me even so?I am reaching, but I fallAnd the stars are black and cold.As I stare into the voidOf a world that cannot holdI'll escape now from the worldFrom the world of Jean ValjeanThere is nowhere I can turnThere is no way to go on.....[He throws himself into the swollen river.]TURNING[The women of Paris mourn their lost loved ones.]WomenDid you see themGoing off to fight?Children of the barricadeWho didn't last the night?Did you see themLying where they died?Someone used to cradle themAnd kiss them when they cried.Did you see themLying side by side?Who will wake them?No one ever will.No one ever told themThat a summer day can kill.They were schoolboysNever held a gunFighting for a new worldThat would rise up like the sunWhere's that new worldNow the fighting's done?Nothing changes, nothing ever willEvery year another brat, another mouth to fill.Same old story, what's the use of tears?What's the use of praying if there's nobody who hears?Turning, turning, turning, turning, turningThrough the years.Turning, turning, turning through the yearsMinutes into hours and the hours into years.Nothing changes, nothing ever canRound and round the roundabout and back where you began!Round and round and back where you began!EMPTY CHAIRS AT EMPTY TABLES[Marius, recovering from his wounds, imagines he's back at the ABC cafe.]MariusThere's a grief that can't be spokenThere's a pain goes on and onEmpty chairs at empty tablesNow my friends are dead and goneHere they talked of revolutionHere it was they lit the flameHere they sang about tomorrowAnd tomorrow never came.From the table in the cornerThey could see a world rebornAnd they rose with voices ringingI can hear them now!The very words that they had sungBecame their last communionOn the lowly barricade..At dawn.Oh my friends, my friends forgive me.[The ghosts of those who died on the barricade appear.]That I live and you are goneThere's a grief that can't be spokenThere's a pain goes on and onPhantom faces at the windowPhantom shadows on the floorEmpty chairs at empty tablesWhere my friends will meet no more.[The ghosts fade away.]Oh my friends, my friends, don't ask meWhat your sacrifice was forEmpty chairs at empty tablesWhere my friends will sing no more...EVERY DAY[Cosette arrives to help Marius in his recovery.]CosetteEvery dayYou walk with stronger stepYou walk with longer stepThe worst is overMariusEvery dayI wonder every dayWho was it brought me hereFrom the barricade?CosetteDon't think about it, Marius.With all the years ahead of us!I will never go awayAnd we will be togetherEvery day. Every day,We'll remember that nightAnd the vow that we made:`A heart full of loveA night full of you'The words are oldBut always trueOh, God, for shameYou did not even know my name.MariusDear Mad'moiselleI was lost in your spell.[Valjean enters, unnoticed.]CosetteA heart full of loveNo fear no regret`My name is Marius Pontmercy'MariusCosette, Cosette!CosetteI saw you waiting and I knew.MariusWaiting for youAt your feetCosetteAt your callBothAnd it wasn't a dreamNot a dreamAfter allValjean (interjections)She was never mine to keepShe is youthfulShe is free.Love is the garden of the youngLet it beLet it beA heart full of loveThis I give youOn this day.[They notice Valjean.]MariusM'sieur, this is a dayI can never forgetIs gratitude enoughFor giving me Cosette?Your home shall be with usAnd not a day shall passBut will will prove our loveTo you, whom we shall callA father to us bothA father to us all.[Cosette leaves.]VALJEAN'S CONFESSIONValjeanNot another word my son,There's something now that must be doneYou've spoken from the heartAnd I must do the sameThere is a story, sirOf slavery and shameThat you alone must know.I never told CosetteShe had enough of tearsShe's never known the truthOf the story you must hearOf years ago.There lived a man named Jean ValjeanHe stole some bread to save his sister's sonFor nineteen winters served his timeIn sweat he washed away his crimeYears agoHe broke parole and lived a life apartHow could he tell Cosette and break her heart?It's for Cosette that this must be facedIf he is caught she is disgracedThe time is come to journey onAnd from this day he must be goneWho am I?Who am I?MariusYou're Jean Valjean!What can I doThat will turn you from this?Monsieur, you cannot leaveWhatever I tell my beloved CosetteShe will never believe!ValjeanMake her believeI have gone on a journeyA long way awayTell her my heart was too full for farewellsIt is better this wayPromise me, M'sieur, Cosette will never know.MariusI give my word.Valjean... what I have spoken, why I must go.MariusFor the sake of Cosette, it must be so.THE WEDDING CHORALE[Marius and Cosette lead a wedding procession.]ChorusRing out the bells upon this day of days!May all the angels of the Lord aboveIn jubilation sing their songs of praise!And crown this blessed time with peace and love.[The procession becomes a dancing celebration. A waltz is played.]Major DomoThe Baron and Baroness de Thenard wish to pay theirrespects to the groom!ThenardierI forget where we metWas it not at the Chateau LafargeWhere the duke did that pukeDown the Duchess's de-coll-etage?MariusNo, `Baron de Thenard'The circles I move in are humbler by far.Go away, Thenardier!Do you think I don't know who you are?Mme. ThenardierHe's not fooled, told you so.Show M'sieur what you've come here to show.Tell the boy what you know![Applause from the dancers as the waltz finishes.]MariusWhen I look at you, I remember EponineShe was more than you deserved, who gave her birthBut now she is with God and happier, I hopeThan here on earth![The waltz starts up again.]ThenardierSo it goes, heaven knowsLife has dealt me some terrible blows.Mme. ThenardierYou've got cash and a heartYou could give us a bit of a startWe can prove, plain as inkYour bride's father is not what you think.ThenardierThere's a tale I could tellMme. ThenardierInformation we're willing to sell.ThenardierThere's a man that he slewI saw the corpse clear as I'm seeing you!What I tell you is true!Mme. ThenardierPity to disturb you at a feast like thisBut five hundred francs surely wouldn't come amiss.MariusIn God's name say what you have to say.ThenardierBut first you pay!What I saw, clear as lightJean Valjean in the sewers that nightHad this corpse on his backHanging there like a great bloody sack.I was there, never fearEven found me this fine souvenir![Thenardier shows Marius a ring.]MariusI know this! This was mine!Surely this is some heavenly sign!ThenardierOne more thing, mark this wellIt was the night the barricades fell.MariusThen it's true, then I'm rightJean Valjean was my saviour that night![Marius hits Thenardier and then throws money at him.]As for you, take this too!God forgive the things that we do.Come my love, come CosetteThis day's blessings are not over yet![Marius and Cosette leave.]BEGGARS AT THE FEASTThenardierAin't it a laugh?Ain't it a treat?Hob-nobbin' hereAmong the elite?Here comes a princeThere goes a Jew.This one's a queerBut what can you do?Paris at my feetParis in the dustAnd here I'm breaking breadWith the upper crust!Beggar at the feast!Master of the dance!Life is easy pickingsIf you grab your chance.Everywhere you goLaw-abiding folkDoing what is decentBut they're mostly broke!Singing to the Lord on SundaysPraying for the gifts He'll send.M. and Mme. ThenardierBut we're the ones who take itWe're the ones who make it in the end!Watch the buggers danceWatch 'em till they dropKeep your wits about youAnd you stand on top!Masters of the landAlways get our shareClear away the barricadesAnd we're still there!We know where the wind is blowingMoney is the stuff we smellAnd when we're rich as CroesusJesus! Won't we see you all in hell![Valjean is alone in the shadows, with a bare wooden cross for company.]ValjeanAlone I wait in the shadowsI count the hours till I can sleepI dreamed a dream Cosette stood byIt made her weep to know I die.Alone at the end of the dayUpon this wedding night I prayTake these children, my Lord, to thy embraceAnd show them grace.God on highHear my prayerTake me nowTo thy careWhere You areLet me beTake me nowTake me thereBring me homeBring me home.[Fantine's spirit appears to Valjean.]FantineM'sieur, I bless your nameM'sieur, lay down your burdenYou raised my child in loveAnd you will be with God.Valjean (interjecting)I am ready, FantineAt the end of my daysShe's the best of my life.[Marius and Cosette rush into the room, but they do not see Fantine.]CosettePapa, papa, I do not understand!Are you alright? They said you'd gone away.ValjeanCosette, my child, am I forgiven now?Thank God, thank God, I've lived to see this day.MariusIt's you who must forgive a thoughtless foolIt's you who must forgive a thankless manIt's thanks to you that I am livingAnd again I lay down my life at your feet.Cosette, your father is a saint.When they wounded meHe took me from the barricadeCarried like a babeAnd brought me home to you!Valjean (to Cosette)Now you are hereAgain beside meNow I can die in peaceFor now my life is blessedCosetteYou will live, Papa, you're going to liveIt's too soon, too soon to say goodbye.ValjeanYes, Cosette, forbid me now to dieI'll obeyI will tryOn this pageI write my last confessionRead it wellWhen I at last am sleeping.It's a storyOf those who always loved youYour mother gave her life for youThen gave you to my keeping.[The other spirits appear.]FantineCome with meWhere chains will never bind youAll your griefAt last, at last behind you.Lord in HeavenLook down on him in mercy.ValjeanForgive me all my trespassesAnd take me to your glory.Valjean, Fantine, and EponineTake my handAnd lead me to salvationTake my loveFor love is everlasting.And rememberThe truth that once was spokenTo love another personIs to see the face of God!EPILOGUE (Finale)ChorusDo you hear the people singLost in the valley of the nightIt is the music of a peopleWho are climbing to the lightFor the wretched of the earthThere is a flame that never diesEven the darkest night will endAnd the sun will rise.They will live again in freedomIn the garden of the LordThey will walk behind the plough-shareThey will put away the swordThe chain will be brokenAnd all men will have their reward!Will you join in our crusade?Who will be strong and stand with me?Somewhere beyond the barricadeIs there a world you long to see?Do you hear the people singSay, do you hear the distant drums?It is the future that they bringWhen tomorrow comes!Will you join in our crusade?Who will be strong and stand with me?Somewhere beyond the barricadeIs there a world you long to see?Do you hear the people singSay, do you hear the distant drums?It is the future that they bringWhen tomorrow comes!Tomorrow comes!Tomorrow comes![The curtain falls.]